Remanence refers to the residual magnetism left in a ferromagnetic material (like iron, nickel, cobalt, and other rare-earth metals or alloys) after a magnetomotive force has been removed. On a magnetized medium, information can be stored on a physical storage medium without constant power: non-volatile memory. The same fundamental principle links all forms of magnetic storage: floppy disks, videocassettes, and hard disk drives.
The magnetic mylar tape in VHS cassettes suspends magnetic particles (like ferric oxide, doped iron oxide, chromium dioxide, and metallic particles like elemental iron, cobalt, and/or nickel) in a polymer binder. Chromium, found primarily in southern Africa and Zimbabwe, supposedly produces a cleaner sound quality than ferric oxides but creates more toxic by-products. Manufacturers began blending chrome-oxide with cobalt-modified iron oxides on magnetic tapes. Hard disk drives also shifted from an iron-oxide base to a cobalt-based alloy. The Democratic Republic of the Congo produces over sixty percent of the world's cobalt.
There are many possible points of failure for VHS cassettes (mold growth, sticky shed syndrome, oxide shedding, physical damage) but all magnetic media has a degradation limit. Eventually, the magnetic information will lose its charge. Iron oxide and cobalt-modified iron oxide are the most stable magnetic particles, but are often used in lower grade VHS videotapes. Over time, the magnetic particles in the binding lose their alignment in a process known as remanence decay: colors fade, pictures blur, static noise spreads. The information is still “there” but has become unreadable. Depending on their storage and usage conditions, you’ll find a persistent argument that VHS cassettes only last ten to thirty years before significant degradation. (Of course, the loudest and most insistent arguments come from home video digitization services.)
With digital information, data remanence refers to the residual presence of data even after it has been erased. The physical properties of storage media can keep a memory of previously written data. Often, deleted data will remain—even if the information appears “gone”—until the operating system uses the space and rewrites new data over it. In the digital age, data remanence can make deleted sensitive information vulnerable to exposure. To ensure that deleted information is truly gone, it must be cleared, purged, destroyed, overwritten, or encrypted.
Before its use in the field of magnetism, the word “remanence” was used to refer to the lasting effect or residual presence of something: something enduring, a kind of persisting, even the remaining presence of a disease. Remanence comes from the word “remain”: that which is left behind or what is left after life is gone.
